---
layout: post
title:  "Understanding the $h$-cobordism theorem: Prelude"
date:   2023-07-15 15:48:21 +0430
tags: [Mathematics, Differential Topology, $h$-cobordism]
excerpt: This is the first in a series of posts where some steps through understanding the $h$-cobordism theorem will be discussed, as I go along. As writing down everything is time-consuming, I will only be mentioning some technicalities that interest me, but will provide the main ideas of other parts as well, so that these posts maintain a form of progress through the end...
continue_reading_button: true
---

This is the first in a series of posts where some steps through understanding the $h$-cobordism theorem will be discussed, as I go along. As writing down everything is time-consuming, I will only be mentioning some technicalities that interest me, but will provide the main ideas of other parts as well, so that these posts still have a form of progress through the theorem. 

Why $h$-cobordism? I was first interested in the topic when I found out that it was used by Smale to prove the $n$-dimensional topological Poincare conjecture for all $n \geq 5$. It is interesting that cases $n=3,4$ were proved much later using sophisticated techniques (I will surely remark on where Smale's argument breaks for $n=3,4$ in later posts). The situation is contrary to our idea that working in higher dimensions seem to be harder. This got me more interested in low-dimensional topology as well. 

Also I got interested in the $h$-cobordism as I intended to understand [Floer homology](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Floer_homology). Floer homology is said to be (and I still don't know why) the infinite-dimensional analogue of [Morse theory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Morse_theory). The $h$-cobordism theorem makes a fair use of Morse theory. So for me, $h$-cobordism has been appealing on its own, and also in line with further interests.

I will mainly be going through [Milnor's _Lectures on the $h$-cobordism theorem_](https://www.maths.ed.ac.uk/~v1ranick/surgery/hcobord.pdf), but not sure exactly for now; hopefully I will later provide a suggested reading plan for interested readers, having done some trial-and-error.

I will end this post with the statement of the theorem. Let $W$ be a compact smooth manifold having two boundary components $V$ and $V'$ such that $V$ and $V'$ are both deformation retracts of $W$. Then $W$ is said to be an _$h$-cobordism_ between $V$ and $V'$. The $h$-cobordism theorem states:

> If $V$ and (hence) $V'$ are simply connected and of dimension greater than 4, then $W$ is diffeomorphic to $V \times [0,1]$, and (consequently) $V$ is diffeomorphic to $V'$.

<!-- A [cobordism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cobordism) $(W; \partial_0 W, \partial_1 W)$ is said to be an $h$-cobordism if the inclusions $\partial_0 W \to W$ and $\partial_1 W \to W$ are homotopy equivalences. A cobordism $(W; \partial_0 W, \partial_1 W)$ is said to be _trivial_ if $(W; \partial_0 W, \partial_1 W)$ and $(\partial_0 W \times [0,1]; \partial_0 W \times \\{0\\}, \partial_0 W \times \\{1\\})$ are diffeomorphic relative to $\partial_0 W$. -->
