---
layout: post
title:  "The $h$-cobordism theorem: Prelude"
date:   2023-07-11 15:48:21 +0430
tags: [Mathematics, Differential Topology, $h$-cobordism]
excerpt: This is the first in a series of posts where some steps through understanding the $h$-cobordism theorem will be discussed, as I go along. As writing down everything is time-consuming, I will only be mentioning some technicalities that interest me, but will provide the main ideas of other parts as well, so that these posts maintain a form of progress through the end...
continue_reading_button: true
---

This is the first in a series of posts where some steps through understanding the $h$-cobordism theorem will be discussed, as I go along. As writing down everything is time-consuming, I will only be mentioning some technicalities that interest me, but will provide the main ideas of other parts as well, so that these posts still have a form of progress through the theorem. 

Why $h$-cobordism? I was first interested in the topic when I found out that it was used by Smale to prove the $n$-dimensional topological Poincare conjecture for all $n \geq 5$. It is interesting that cases $n=3,4$ were proved much later using sophisticated techniques (I will surely remark on where Smale's argument breaks for $n=3,4$ in later posts). The situation is contrary to our idea that working in higher dimensions seem to be harder. This got me more interested in low-dimensional topology as well. 

Also I got interested in the $h$-cobordism as I intended to understand Floer homology. Floer homology is said to be (and I still don't know why) the infinite-dimensional analogue of Morse theory. The $h$-cobordism theorem makes a fair use of Morse theory. So for me, $h$-cobordism has been appealing on its own, and also in line with further interests.

I will mainly be going through Milnor's _Lectures on the $h$-cobordism theorem_, but not sure exactly for now; hopefully I will later provide a suggested reading plan for interested readers, having done some trial-and-error.